---
layout: post
title: "Stereotype Threat"
date:   2015-01-11 12:00:00
categories: blog
---
This week’s blog is about a well-documented (and little-known and scary) sociological phenomenon known as stereotype threat. Social scientists have found that someone’s behavior and performance can be seriously affected by that person’s awareness of how her actions might confirm (or defy) well-known stereotypes regarding her identity. Stereotype threat interferes with performance for a number of reasons. Think about it: if you were completing a task and at a certain point realized that your actions/performance/behavior could be reduced societal stereotype about a group with which you identify. Think about how that might distract or disempower or disturb or upset you. Researchers have demonstrated in hundreds of experiments the ways stereotype threat drives certain groups to perform worse in a range of different settings and how this underperformance has major ramifications.

Stereotype threat makes sense in a very sad way. It’s something I knew existed before I ever researched it for this blog post. But before it was just an uncomfortable feeling. Now I see that it’s a sociological mechanism backed by peer-reviewed articles. The data that back up claims about stereotype threat and academic jargon used to explain it certainly don’t capture the uneasy feeling of being the gay guy on the soccer field. Obviously not as consequential as experiencing that feeling in the classroom or in the workplace. To be honest, since sexual orientation is in a lot of ways less visible than gender or race, I’m reticent to give more examples because it’s difficult for me to explain away certain actions/behaviors by invoking the stereotype threat. It’s hard for me to parse it all out.

An awareness of stereotype threat is not a cure-all. It’s a starting point. At DBC and beyond, I think/hope that one way to sidestep the stereotype threat is discussion with your peers and coworkers. Sure, these discussions can be (and probably should be at some point) about stereotype threat. But I also think it’s important to talk about other things so that group members know each other as individuals. There’s something very cliche in that ‘solution’ - apologies - but at least in my experience, this approach is key to overcoming the prejudices and stereotypes that betray our values but nonetheless remain deeply entrenched in our society.
