---
layout: post
title: "A Post on Values"
date:   2015-01-18 12:30:00
categories: blog
---
And now an all-over-the-place discussion of values. Scanning over a big list of values, these six stuck out: honesty, integrity, enthusiasm, self-respect, passion, and empathy. These are probably a lot of people’s go to values (which is a good thing). On a scale from 1-5, (1 being the bad side of the spectrum and 5 being the living-up-to-my values side), I’d say that I’d (generously) score myself between a 4 and 5 for each of the values above. Maybe I’m biased though.

On its surface, self-respect might seem like an selfish value, especially in comparison to the other options that I could’ve chosen from (examples: Public Service, Helping Others). But I think that so much good emanates from respecting yourself. My conception of self-respect involves setting high expectations and living up to them. In this way, self-respect enables me. It recognizes and respects my other values and goals, and charts a path to achieving or embodying them.

It’s great to feel connected to certain values, but I think that we develop and make manifest our values when we’re faced with adversity or something disruptive. Just by knowing my values and seeking to live up to them on a day-to-day basis isn’t really enough; sometimes I think I might do better by challenging myself more often or putting myself in positions to demonstrate or flex my values. Maybe that’s a value in and of itself. But what I’m saying is that values are ideals; they’re aspirational/ they will never been something I “have.” Which means the more one is in situations that test one’s values, the more one would be able to appreciate the distance between oneself and your ideal. I think DBC will test a lot of the aforementioned values, and if I do well to constantly remind myself of the values and their importance, then I think I can mitigate the negative effects of stereotype threat.
