---
layout: post
title: "Learning from Conflict"
date:   2015-01-23 12:30:00
categories: blog
---
I’m sure there’s a body of psychological/sociological research explaining why people make missteps when they’re in the midst of a conflict. When emotions are running high, there’s a fat chance you won’t act the way your sober, calm, rational self would act. Hindsight being 20/20, analyzing a previous conflict illuminates the courses of action we didn’t take or didn’t see or didn’t want to see. In reflecting on a specific instance of conflict, you’re hoping not only to understand the entirety of the negative interaction (the causes, the build up, the reaction, the fallout, etc), but also to fortify yourself for the next round, however different the circumstances might be.

^^ All valid, right? Sure. In theory it’s great, in practice it’s much harder.

I’ll give it a shot though. I felt unacknowledged and disrespected as a result of the incident/conflict. I felt hugely disappointed in my friends (and myself). Beyond that, the conflict made me experience a deep pessimism for the place I’m from. The source was actually a run-in-the-mill comment (or series of comments) that wasn’t even directed at me. I was watching a sports game on TV with a group of friends (and my friend’s friends) and one of the guys (just for context: he’s white/straight/extremely privileged - traits that obviously aren’t negative on their own but relevant for the conflict) kept shouting slurs whenever a player screwed up. I can’t believe I’m about qualify the use slurs but I feel like I should say there was no detection of sarcasm or self-awareness in these slurs. This was just a person using racist/homophobic/misogynist slurs to express his disgust. In that moment, I shut down. I felt extremely self-conscious and felt my heart rate speed up. Time passed.  I collected myself in the bathroom. I mustered up the courage to say something, but nothing profound or articulate: just barely enough to lodge a complaint, to demonstrate that I had taken offense. Then came the awkwardness, the silence, and half-assed apologies. I wanted for it be resolved so I said all I wanted to do was talk it through and we did and then I shook hands with the person. Wholly unsatisfying resolution, in retrospect. I don’t regret having the conversation but I wish I had done it differently. I wish I would’ve recognized that I didn’t need to be there in the first place; that as soon as I heard the first slur I would’ve said my goodbyes and just left. I didn’t stay because I was brave and wanted to stand up to the guy and moralize. I stayed because I was paralyzed and didn’t know what else to do. I wanted to be able to be there and be just like the 5 or so other guys I was watching with who didn’t seem fazed at all by the slurs. Now I don’t. My takeaway from that conflict was that sometimes the desire to normalize, to moralize, to be accepted is an impulse that should be resisted or at least scrutinized.
