---
layout: post
title: "Together: Pairing and Phase 0"
date:   2015-01-04 12:00:00
categories: blog
---
So far in Phase 0, I’ve paired with other FDs several times to work through challenges. These sessions have all been different. Of course the content of each session has varied, but so has the dynamic between me and the other person. Each time I pair with someone new I’m required not only to meet them but to understand where they’re at with the material, their learning style, and how they like to work with others. At times I’ve given short shrift to these questions and later regretted it. Investing the time to get to know the other person - before diving into the work - definitely pays off; sessions are more productive (i.e. we cover more ground instead of rushing for a solution) and actually take less to do it. So far the most fun/rewarding pairing session I’ve had has been when my partner and I figured out a solution quickly and decided to try solving it a different way that defied the directions but would ultimately be more efficient. The reason I found it exhilarating is that I don’t think either of us would’ve taken this extra step on our own. We got demoralized at different points and relied on each other’s direction and encouragement.

I should say that pairing sessions are unlike any other group work I’ve done. First off, it’s a different, more dynamic kind of collaboration. Second, there’s the feedback component. I felt nervous reading my feedback. Even though the feedback is anonymous, it was tough to fight the impulse to do the detective work that would connect the criticism with a specific pairing sessions. Basically I learned that my impulse when receiving feedback is to explain it away. I think that if I can only pinpoint the exact moment that led someone else to criticize me, then I can absolve myself of that error. I think you’ll agree that’s not healthy or productive. Maybe it’s because I’m not used to such constant or structured feedback or maybe I’m like most people and don’t readily or easily confront criticism. But that’s precisely why the feedback has been helpful so far - not only receiving, but also providing it as well. It’s made me more focused during the sessions (though I’ll admit I sometimes struggle to remember the details of a 1+ hour long pairing session during which my brain was focused on solving the task at hand) and more conscious learner. By reading the feedback others wrote for me, I learned that I need to be more structured in my approach to solving the various problems that come up during a challenge. Tall order. But the continuous feedback will help me monitor my progress and also motivate me to stay vigilant in addressing these issues.
